FLUX, FROM WALL STREET TO
EUROPE.
UNCERTAINTY LOOMS AS THE EURO
WEAKENS AND THE FEDERAL RESERVE
CONSIDERS WHEN TO RAISE INTEREST
RATES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD, A RETURN TO E DATHRK
AGES FOR SYRIA.
DESTRUCTION, DISPLACEMENT, AND
THE DEADLY CONSEQUENCES OF WAR.
FORMER BRITISH FOREIGN SECRETARY
DAVID MILIBAND ON A HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS UNCHECKED.
>> THE POLITICAL OPTION IS
GETTING WORSE, THE CONTAGEN
SPREADING INTO IRAQ AND
CIVILIANS CAUGHT IN THE
CROSSFIRE AND RUN ABLE TO GET
THE MOST BASIC ELEMENTS OF
DIGNITY AND SUPPORT.
>> Woodruff: TECH GIANTS FIGHT
FOR A SEAT IN THE CLASSROOM.
WHY EVEN IN AMISH COUNTRY,
PLE,AP GOOGLE AND OTHERS WANT
THEIR PRODUCTS USED BY TEACHERS
AND STUDENTS, A MARKET WORTH
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS A YEAR.
>> WHAT YOU ACTUALLY PURCHASE
SHOULD BE DRIVEN BY WHAT YOU
WANT TO ACTUALLY DO WITH THAT
TECHNOLOGY.
YOU WANT THEM RESEARCHING, YOU
WANT THEM PRODUCING, YOU WANT
THEM SEEKING, ASKING QUESTIONS,
WHAT ARE ALL OF THE KINDS OF
THINGS THAT YOU WANT STUDENTS TO
BE ABLE TO DO, THEIR GAINS AND
ACHIEVEMENTS.
>> Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY,
MARK SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON
ARE HERE, TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE STORIES
WE'RE COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: WALL STREET CLOSED
OUT THE WEEK WITH A NEW SELL-
OFF, A DAY AFTER A BIG RALLY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST NEARLY 150 POINTS TO FINISH
NEAR 17,750.
THE NASDAQ FELL 21, AND THE S-
AND-P 500 SLIPPED 12.
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW WAS DOWN
ABOUT .5%.
THE NASDAQ AND THE S-AND-P LOST
ABOUT 1%.
WE'LL TRY TO GET A BEAD ON
WHAT'S DRIVING THE MARKET'S UPS
AND DOWNS, AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
POLICE IN FERGUSON, MISSOURI,
SPENT A SECOND DAY HUNTING
SUSPECTS IN THE SHOOTING OF TWO
OFFICERS.
IT HAPPENED EARLY YESTERDAY, AS
A DEMONSTRATION AT POLICE
HEADQUARTERS WAS ENDING.
THIS AFTERNOON, ST. LOUIS COUNTY
POLICE CHIEF JOHN BELMAR TOLD
REPORTERS THE SEARCH HAS COME UP
EMPTY SO FAR.
>> I CANNOT TELL YOU AT THIS
POINT THAT AN ARREST IS
IMMINENT.
THERE'S CERTAINLY NOBODY IN
CUSTODY.
WHEN WE GET TO THE POINT WHERE
WE FEEL LIKE THAT WE HAVE ACTIVE
LEADS, IF WE CAN DO ANYTHING
THROUGH YOU, TO HAVE THE
COMMUNITY ASSIST US, WE'LL
CERTAINLY LET YOU KNOW.
OFFICERS ESCAPED WITHOUT ANY
PERMANENT INJURY.
THE MAN WHO BREACHED WHITE HOUSE
SECURITY LAST FALL, PLEADED
GUILTY TODAY.
OMAR GONZALEZ JUMPED THE FENCE
ON SEPTEMBER 19TH, AND MADE IT
DEEP INSIDE THE EXECUTIVE
MANSION WITH A KNIFE BEFORE
BEING TACKLED.
THE FIRST FAMILY WAS NOT THERE
AT THE TIME.
THE INCIDENT LED TO THE
RESIGNATION OF THE SECRET
SERVICE DIRECTOR.
PRESIDENT OBAMA CHECKED UP TODAY
ON THE  HOSPITAL THAT TRIGGERED
A SCANDAL IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS.
LONG DELAYS AND FALSIFIED WAIT
LISTS AT THE V.A. FACILITY IN
PHOENIX, ARIZONA LED TO REFORMS
AND RESIGNATIONS.
THE PRESIDENT VISITED THE SITE
TODAY.
HE SAID THE V.A. IS "CHIPPING
AWAY" AT THE PROBLEMS, BUT
THERE'S MUCH MORE TO DO.
MR. OBAMA ALSO MET WITH THE
PARENTS OF KAYLA MUELLER, WHILE
IN PHOENIX.
THE AID WORKER DIED IN "ISLAMIC
STATE" HANDS IN SYRIA LAST
MONTH.
THE MILITANTS SAID SHE WAS
KILLED IN AN AIR STRIKE, BUT
U.S. OFFICIALS  DISPUTED THAT
CLAIM.
IN IRAQ, GOVERNMENT TROOPS
PRESSED THEIR FIGHT TO RETAKE
SADDAM HUSSEIN'S HOME TOWN FROM
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS.
COMMANDERS SAID THEY HOPE TO
EXPECT TO REACH THE CENTER OF
TIKRIT IN TWO TO THREE DAYS.
THE OFFENSIVE IS RELYING HEAVILY
ON SHIITE MILITIAS, AND A
SPOKESMAN FOR IRAQ'S TOP
SHIITE CLERIC WARNED BAGHDAD
TODAY TO MAKE SURE THEY GET
PAID.
>> ( translated ): THE RECENT
VICTORIES SCORED BY OUR GHTEFIRS
AGAINST ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS
NECESSITATES THAT THE GOVERNMENT
PAY HEED AND PROVIDE CARE TO ALL
TROOPS.
THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD EXERT
UTMOST EFFORTS TO BOOST THE
FIGHTERS' PERFORMANCE, TO
SAFEGUARD AND PERPETUATE THEIR
GAINS AND ACHIEVEMENTS.
>> Woodruff: SEPARATELY, A
PROMINENT SUNNI CLERIC URGED
OFFICIALS TO PREVENT THE
MILITIAS FROM STAGING REVENGE
ATTACKS AGAINST SUNNIS IN
TIKRIT.
AND IN GERMANY, MUSLIM WOMEN
TEACHERS HAVE WON THE RIGHT TO
WEAR TRADITIONAL HEAD SCARVES IN
THEIR CLASSROOMS.
THE COUNTRY'S HIGHEST COURT
TODAY STRUCK DOWN LAWS THAT
BANNED THE HIJAB, SAYING THEY
VIOLATE RELIGIOUS FREEDOM.
SUPPORTERS OF THE BANS ARGUED
THE HEAD SCARVES CAUSE
DISRUPTIONS IN SCHOOLS, WHILE
MUSLIM WOMEN SAID THE
PROHIBITION HAS BLOCKED THEM
FROM TEACHING JOBS.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
A GLOBAL ECONOMY IN FLUX;
WHY THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN
SYRIA THREATENS TO PUSH THAT
NATION INTO THE DARK AGES;
COMPETING TECH GIANTS RACE TO
WIN OVER TEACHERS AND STUDENTS
IN THE CLASSROOM;
AN UPDATE ON THE BOSTON BOMBING
TRIAL;
AND, FROM TEA KETTLES TO TOWERS,
THE LIFE AND WORK OF POST-MODERN
ARCHITECT MICHAEL GRAVES.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS ANOTHER
TOUGH DAY FOR THE FINANCIAL
MARKETS, CAPPING A VOLATILE
WEEK, ONE MARKED BY ANXIETY OVER
INTEREST RATES, THE DOLLAR, AND
FALLING OIL PRICES, AMONG OTHER
THINGS.
MORE PUZZLING IN SOME WAYS:
THERE WAS GOOD ECONOMIC NEWS
EARLIER THIS WEEK, AND THAT
STILL SEEMED TO UPSET INVESTORS.
WHAT'S HAPPENING HERE?
AND DOES THE VOLATILITY OF
RECENT WEEKS SUGGEST THE END OF
A BULL MARKET?
MARK VITNER IS A MANAGING
DIRECTOR AND SENIOR ECONOMIST AT
WELLS FARGO AND JOINS ME NOW.
SO, MARK VITNER, HOW DO YOU
EXPLAIN ALL THIS VOLATILITY AND
ESPECIALLY THE DOWNWARD MOVE
AFTER THE GOOD NEWS ON JOBS LAST
WEEK?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S REALLY
JUST PART OF THE ADJUSTMENT
PROCESS.
WE'VE HAD INTEREST RATES STUCK
AT ZERO FOR EIGHT YEARS, NOW,
AND THE ECONOMY HAS IMPROVED TO
THE POINT WHERE THE FEDERAL
RESERVE IS LIKELY TO RAISE
INTEREST RATES PROBABLY IN JUNE
BUT PROBABLY NO LATE THAN
SEPTEMBER.
THEY'RE ALMOST DEFINITELY GOING
UP THIS YEAR, AND THAT CAUSES
PEOPLE TO REASSESS HOW THEY
POSITION CERTAIN INVESTMENTS.
COMPANIES THAT ARE INTEREST RATE
SENSITIVE ARE NOW FALLING OUT OF
FAVOR AND WE'VE GOT A LOT ELSE
GOING ON IN THE WORLD THAT'S
UNNERVING THE MARKET.
THE DOLLAR HAS STRENGTHENED
TREMENDOUSLY AND HAS DONE IT
VERY FAST AND WE'VE HAD THIS
INCREDIBLE SLIDE IN OIL PRICES
WHICH YOU WOULD THINK IS A GOOD
THING BUT IT'S GOT PEOPLE
QUESTIONING WHY ON EARTH ARE
PRICES FALLING SO FAR SO FAST.
>> Woodruff: FIRST ON INTEREST
RATES, HASN'T THE FED BEEN
GIVING A WARNING FOR MONTHS NOW
SOME HIKE IN INTEREST RATES IS
COMING?
WHY AREN'T THERE EXPECTATIONS
ABOUT THAT NOW.
>> WELL, YOU WOULD THINK THAT
PEOPLE WOULD BE USED TO THIS
IDEA.
THE FED'S BEEN THINKING ABOUT
RAISING INTEREST RATES FOR A
LONG TIME, AND I IT'S THE FIRST
TIME WE'VE EVER HAD TO START
FROM ZERO.
THE FEDERAL FUNDS RATE IS
ROUGHLY AROUND 10 BASIS POINTS,
AND WE'VE NEVER HAD TO MOVE AWAY
FROM THE ZERO INTEREST BOUND
BEFORE, AND FOLKS ARE REALLY
WONDERING HOW VULNERABLE IS THE
ECONOMY, HOW WELL CAN WE TAKE A
QUARTER POINT OR A HALF POINT
INCREASE IN INTEREST RATES OVER
THE NEXT FEW MONTHS?
MY CUT TELLS ME I THINK THE
ECONOMY IS PLENTY STRONG, WE'LL
BE ABLE TO WITHSTAND IT, BUT THE
FED WILL MOVE CAUTIOUSLY, AND
IT'S STILL THE ADJUSTMENT, IT'S
THE SHIFT FROM HAVING RAZE RACEO
FOR YEARS TO AN INTEREST RATE
THAT'S UNNERVING THE MARKET.
>> Woodruff: ONE THING IS THE
STRENGTHENING OF OTHER
CURRENCIES ESPECIALLY THE EURO.
WHAT ABOUT THAT?
WHAT'S BEHIND THAT AND HOW
SERIOUS A CONCERN IS IT?
>> WELL, IN TERMS OF WHAT'S
DRIVING THE DOLLAR UP, WE'RE IN
A MUCH DIFFERENT PLACE THAN
EUROPE IS RIGHT NOW AND, IN MANY
RESPECTS, THE UNITED STATES IS
THE STRONGEST ECONOMY IN THE
DEVELOPED WORLD RIGHT NOW.
THE FEDERAL RESERVE STOPPED
PURCHASING BONDS IN OUR MARKET
WELL OVER A YEAR AGO, BACK IN
LATE 2013.
THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK JUST
EMBARKED ON THEIR OWN
QUANTITATIVE EASING WHERE
THEY'RE PURCHASING SECURITIES.
WE'RE GETTING SET TO RAISE
INTEREST RATES, SO CAPITAL IS
FLOWING INTO THE UNITED STATES.
AND THAT'S LIKELY TO CONTINUE.
BUT, AGAIN, IS A STRONGER
DOLLAR, IS IT GOOD NEWS OR BAD
NEWS FOR THE U.S.?
IT'S GOOD NEWS.
WE HAVE A TRADE DEFICIT.
WE IMPORT MORE THAN WE EXPORT.
AND THE STRONGER DOLLAR
CERTAINLY IS GOING TO HURT PARTS
OF THE ECONOMY.
SOME MANUFACTURERS WILL BE
DISADVANTAGED BUT FOR THE
ECONOMY OVERALL IT INCREASES OUR
PURCHASING POWER, IT WILL BE A
GOOD THING.
IT'S JUST THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS
IN GOING TOWARDS A STRONGER
DOLLAR THAT'S SO DIFFICULT FOR
THE FINANCIAL MARKETS TO TAKE.
>> VERY QUICKLY, AMERICANS
YOU'RE SAYING SHOULD SLEEP
SOUNDLY TONIGHT RATHER THAN
LYING AWAKE, WORRYING ABOUT ALL
OF THIS?
>> WELL, A LOT OF TIMES WHEN THE
MARKET GOES DOWN, PEOPLE ARE
LIKE WOE IS ME, WHAT'S GOING ON
HERE.
YOU'LL HAVE TO REMEMBER THAT
WHILE WE'VE HAD BIG DECLINES
WE'RE CLOSE TO ALL-TIME HIGHS IN
THE MARKET.
IN VALUATIONS, I WOULDN'T SAY
THE TOCK MARKET IS OVERVALUED
BURKS IT'S FULLY VALUED.
NOW THAT WE'RE GOING INTO A
DIFFERENT ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT,
ONE THAT'S GOING TO HAVE A
STRONGER DOLLAR AND INTEREST
RATES ARE LIKELY TO RISE A
LITTLE BUT STILL LIKELY TO
REMAIN RELATIVELY LOW, FOLKS ARE
GOING TO HAVE TO ADJUST THE
PORTFOLIO SOMEWHAT.
>> Woodruff: MARK VITNER,
WELLS FARGO, THANK YOU.
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Woodruff: AS THE SYRIAN CIVIL
WAR MARKS ANOTHER GRIM MILESTONE
THIS WEEKEND, MORE THAN 20
LEADING INTERNATIONAL AID
ORGANIZATIONS HAVE ISSUED A
REPORT SHARPLY CRITICIZING THE
UNITED NATION'S SECURITY
COUNCIL'S RESPONSE TO THE
CONFLICT, AND RESULTING
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS.
THE GROUPS, INCLUDING OXFAM AND
THE INTERNATIONAL RESCUE
COMMITTEE, SIGNED OFF ON A
REPORT CALLED "FAILING SYRIA",
CALLING THE U.N.'S LACK OF
ACTION, QUOTE, "A STAIN ON THE
CONSCIENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY."
ALL THE WHILE, AS THE WAR ENTERS
ITS FIFTH YEAR ON SUNDAY, MANY
REMAIN CAUGHT IN THE CROSSFIRE.
>> ( translated ): THESE ARE
CIVILIANS AND FAMILIES.
I REALLY DON'T KNOW WHAT TO SAY.
THEY HAVE BEEN BOMBING US SINCE
THE EARLY MORNING.
BARREL AFTER BARREL.
>> Woodruff: THE REPORT POINTS
OUT THAT LAST YEAR ALONE, 2.5
MILLION SYRIANS WERE FORCED FROM
THEIR HOMES BY FIGHTING.
THE DEMAND FOR HUMANITARIAN AID
HAS INCREASED BY MORE THAN 30%.
NEARLY A QUARTER MILLION SYRIANS
ARE TRAPPED BY MILITARY SIEGES.
MEMBER STATES HAVE DONATED JUST
AND JOINING ME NOW IS ONE OF THE
SIGNATORIES OF THE REPORT,
INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE
C.E.O. AND FORMER BRITISH
FOREIGN SECRETARY DAVID
MILIBAND.
DAVID MILIBAND, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
AGAIN, I SAW ONE OF THE GROUPS
THAT SIGNED THIS REPORT SAID
THIS COULD TURN OUT TO BE THE
DARKEST CHAPTER IN THE HISTORY
OF THE U.N.
DO YOU AGREE?
>> WELL, I THINK LITERALLY AND
METAPHORICALLY SYRIA IS GOING
BACK INTO THE DARK AGE ALSO
LITERALLY BECAUSE THE LIGHTS ARE
GOING OUT ALL OVER SIR.  I CAN'T
83% OF THE LIGHTS HAVE GONE OUT
OVER THE LAST FOUR YEARS, AND
METAPHORICALLY BECAUSE OF THE
DEATH AND DESTRUCTION AND
DISPLACEMENT THERE AND THAT IS A
DARK STAIN ON THE UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL WHICH TOOK
THREE YEARS TO PASS THE MOST
BASIC HUMANITARIAN AID
RESOLUTION AND IS NOW NOT
FORCING IT THROUGH.
THE WORDS ARE THERE ON PAPER
ABOUT HELP FOR CIVILIANS BUT THE
HELP HAS NOT BEEN FORTHCOMING ON
THE GROUND.
>> Woodruff: WHY IS THE BLAME
LAID ON THE U.N. SECURITY
COUNCIL RATHER THAN SYRIA, IT'S
LEADER, PRESIDENT ASSAD, THE
COUNTRIES THAT ARE BACKING HIM,
IRAN, RUSSIA, CHINA AND EVEN ON
THE OTHER COUNTRIES INVOLVED IN
THIS WAR?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT A MATTER OF
EXCUSING THE COMBATANTS FOR
THEIR CRIMES, THE DROPPING OF
BOMBS ON CIVILIANS, THE
TARGETING OF AID WORKERS AND OF
CIVILIANS AND DOCTORS, IT'S NOT
A MATTER OF EXCUSING THEM AND
SOMEHOW BLAMING THE U.N.
SECURITY COUNCIL INSTEAD, BUT
OTHER COUNTRIES YOU MENTIONED,
OBVIOUSLY RUSSIA IS ON THE U.N.
SECURITY COUNCIL AND RUSSIA
ALONG WITH U.K., U.S., FRARNTION
CHINA, THE PERMANENT MEN'S OF
THE SECURITY COUNCIL FINALLY
TOOK A STEP A YEAR AGO TO CALL
FOR CROSS BORDER AID, TO CALL
FOR AID ACROSS CONFLICT LINES IN
THE SYRIAN THEATER OF WAR BUT
HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO OR WILLING
TO PUT THE POLITICAL PRESSURE
AND THE POLITICAL ENGAGEMENT TO
GET THAT MOST BASIC CIVILIAN AID
THROUGH.
JUST TO GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE, THE
SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE U.N.
HAS REPORTED THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT INSISTED MEDICAL
SUPPLIES BE TAKEN OFF TRUCKS
GOING INTO SYRIA BUT IS THERE
ANY ACCOUNTABILITY OR COMEBACK?
NO, THERE ISN'T.
THAT IS WHY IT'S SO IMPORTANT
NOW, THE FIFTH YEAR OF THE WAR,
THE POLITICAL OPTION IS WORSE,
THE CON TABLEN SPREADING INTO
IRAQ AND THE CIVILIANS CAUGHT NO
THE CROSSFIRE ARE UNABLE TO GET
THE MOST BASIC ELEMENTS OF
DIGNITY AND SUPPORT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT'S AN EXAMPLE
OF THE KIND OF POLITICAL WEIGHT
ONE OF THESE COUNTRIES CAN THROW
INTO THE SITUATION THAT WOULD
MAKE A DIFFERENCE AND IS IT ANY
SURPRISE THE U.N. IS NOT ABLE TO
FORCE THE COUNTRY TO ACCEPT A
CHANGE IT DOESN'T WANT TO MAKE?
>> WELL, I THINK A VERY BASIC
POINT IS THE FOLLOWING -- THE
FOREIGN MINISTERS OF THE COUNCIL
COUNTRY CAN'T BE ON SYRIA 24
HOURS A DAY.
THEY HAVE UKRAINE, THE IRAN
NUCLEAR TALKS.
WE HAVE BEEN SAYING CLEARLY
EVERY PERMANENT MEMBER OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL PLUS THE
REGIONAL PLAYERS SHOULD APPOINT
A HUMANITARIAN ENVOY TO GIVE THE
DAY-TO-DAY POLITICAL, PRACTICAL
PRESSURE TO DELIVER THE AID.
TO GIVE YOU AN HISTORIC EXAMPLE,
EVEN IN THE MIDST OF THE SUDAN
WAR IN THE NITLE 1990s,
OPERATION LIFELINE SUDAN GOT
HUMANITARIAN AID INTO THE
COUNTRY AND BECAUSE OF THAT
DAILY COMMUNICATION.
SYRIA IS MORE IN THE HEADLINES
AND CIVILIANS ARE LEFT WITHOUT
HELP AND COMBATANTS ARE LEFT
WITHOUT PRESSURE AND
COMBATTABILITY FOR NOT LIVING UP
TO THE BASIC NORMS AND LAWS OF
WAR.
SO NO ONE IS SAYING THIS IS
EASY.
UNLESS THERE IS POLITICAL
SUPPORT FOR THE EFFORTS OF THE
U.N. OFFICIALS, THEY ARE LEFT
STRANDED WHEN THE COMBATANTS AND
THE GOVERNMENT AND 80 TO 85% OF
THE CASES AND REBEL GROUPS IN
THE REMAINING CASES STAND IN THE
WAY OF DELIVERY OF HUMANITARIAN
AID.
>> Woodruff: SURELY THE
GOVERNMENTS INVOLVED KNOW HAVING
A DAILY PRESENCE WOULD MAKE A
DIFFERENCE.
WHY HAVEN'T THEY DONE IT?
>> I THINK THE TRUTH IS SYRIA
LOOKS TOO DIFFICULT AT THE
MOMENT AND GETS MORE DIFFICULT
EVERY YEAR.
THE TROUBLE IS IN A YEAR'S TIME,
IT WILL BE EVEN MORE DIFFICULT.
THERE WILL BE MORE FRAGTATION,
MORE BLOOD LETTING, MORE
IMPLOSION INSIDE THE COUNTRY.
SO FOR POLITICIANS AROUND THE
WORLD IS SKEPTICAL PUBLICS AND
WITH FOCUS ON THE HOME FRONT,
IT'S INEVITABLE THAT THE
PRESSURE ON THEM IS TO TURN AWAY
BECAUSE THERE ARE NO EASY
ANSWERS.
BUT THE URN SECURITY COUNCIL WAS
SET UP TO MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE
IN THE SITUATION OF THE SYRIAN
CIVILIANS DON'T GET FORGOTTEN
AND THE PRECEDENT BEING SET IS
ONE THAT IS REALLY DANGEROUS TO
THE 21st CENTURY BECAUSE IT'S
NOT JUST THE HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS, IT'S THAT THE
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS ITSELF
CAUSES POLITICAL INSTABILITY
SPREADING ACROSS THE REGION.
>> Woodruff: IT IS CERTAINLY A
DARK MOMENT AND NO PROSPECTS FOR
CHANGE AT THIS POINT.
DAVID MILIBAND, THE
INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: VISIT MOST ANY
SCHOOL THESE DAYS AND YOU'LL
LIKELY FIND TEACHERS USING
LAPTOPS, TABLETS AND OTHER HIGH-
TECH TOOLS.
THE COMPETITION FOR THE
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY MARKET IS
FIERCE, YET TEACHERS AND
ADMINISTRATORS OFTEN FIND IT
DIFFICULT TO BUY THE RIGHT TOOLS
TO FIT THEIR NEEDS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL BROWN HAS A
REPORT FROM OUR AMERICAN
GRADUATE UNIT ON THAT BATTLE AND
AN UNLIKELY PLACE WHERE IT'S
PLAYING OUT.
>> Reporter: IN OHIO'S AMISH
COUNTRY, TRADITIONS ARE TAKEN
VERY SERIOUSLY.
MANY FAMILIES TRAVEL BY HORSE
AND BUGGY, DRESS IN THE FASHIONS
OF THEIR FOREFATHERS, AND
BELIEVE IN A SIMPLE HOME LIFE
ONE WITHOUT ELECTRICITY,
TELEVISIONS OR PHONES.
BUT EVEN IN A COMMUNITY THAT IS
SLOW TO EMBRACE CHANGE, THERE'S
A BATTLE BEING WAGED OVER
EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY, A MARKET
WORTH $8 BILLION A YEAR
>> WELL WE USE COMPUTERS AND
iPADS, LAPTOPS AND CHROME BOOKS.
>> Reporter: THIS AMISH FIFTH
GRADER WE'LL CALL JACOB AGREED
TO SPEAK WITH US, BUT HIS
PARENTS ASKED THAT WE NOT
IDENTIFYIM. H
COMPANIES LIKE APPLE, GOOGLE AND
MICROSOFT ARE FIGHTING TO GET
THEIR PRODUCTS IN CLASSROOMS
LIKE HIS.
AND TEACHER SHAWN SNYDER'S.
SNYDER USES SMARTBOARDS, LAPTOPS
AND TABLETS FOR MANY OF HER
LESSONS:
>> I WOULD NEVER WANT A PIECE OF
CHALK IN THE CLASSROOM AGAIN, I
CAN'T IMAGINE TEACHING WITHOUT
TECHNOLOGY.
JUST HAVING TECHNOLOGY ENABLES
ME OR MY STUDENTS TO LOOK UP
SOMETHING ONLINE, AND WE CAN
INSTANTLY ACCESS VIDEO OF PLACES
THEY'VE NEVER BEEN BEFORE.
PICTURES OF THINGS THEY'VE NEVER
SEEN.
>> Reporter: THE COMPANIES
BEHIND EDUCATIONAL-TECHNOLOGY
PRODUCTS SPEND A LOT OF MONEY TO
GET SCHOOLS TO BUY THE HARDWARE,
DEPLOYING SALES STAFF TO
DISTRICTS AROUND THE COUNTRY AND
CREATING MARKETING TOOLS,
INCLUDING ADS.
AND RECENTLY THE RACE FOR
SUPREMACY IN SCHOOLS HAS
TIGHTENED BETWEEN APPLE'S iPAD
AND GOOGLE'S CHROMEBOOK.
THE iPAD HAD BEEN THE TOP SELLER
IN THE EDUCATION MARKET, BUT IN
THIRD QUARTER OF 2014 GOOGLE
SHIPPED MORE CHROMEBOOKS, THE
FIRST TIME THAT'S HAPPENED SINCE
ITS DEBUT TWO YEARS EARLIER.
OHIO'S SOUTHEAST LOCAL SCHOOL
DISTRICT USES BOTH BUT THE iPADS
CAME FIRST AFTER A GROUP OF
PARENTS RAISED MONEY TO BUY
THEM.
MATH AND SCIENCE TEACHER SARAH
MEENAN HAS BEEN USING THEM IN
HER CLASSROOM:
>> IT'S BEEN FUN TO HAVE THE
iPADS FIRST AND GET THE KIDS
INTERESTED IN THOSE AND LOVE
DOING THE HANDS-ON.
>> Reporter: AND FIFTH GRADER
DAWSON TROYER HAS FOUND iPADS
HELPFUL:
>> I LIKE THAT IT'S AN EASY
LEARNING TOOL YOU CAN JUST PICK
AN APP AND YOU CAN CLOSE OUT OF
IT EASY WITH THE HOME BUTTON.
>> Reporter: BUT WHEN THE
DISTRICT RECEIVED A STATE GRANT
OF MORE THAN $400,000 TO BUY
MORE HARDWARE, TEACHERS AND
ADMINISTRATORS CHOSE
CHROMEBOOKS.
STUDENTS HERE START USING
GOOGLE'S DOCS AND GOOGLE DRIVE
STARTING IN SECOND GRADE AND
THEY'RE TOOLS THAT HAVE BEEN
USEFUL FOR GROUP PROJECTS.
ACCORDING TO FIFTH GRADER BLAISE
MORRISON.
>> LAST WEEK WE DID AN INDIAN
PROJECT AND WE HAD TO LOOK UP
THERE WAS THIS LITTLE THING
WHERE YOU COULD TEXT YOUR GROUP
MATES AND LIKE YOU ARE NOT
TALKING AND IT'S KIND OF FUN.
>> Reporter: CURRICULUM DIRECTOR
HOLLY MASTRINE SAYS THE DISTRICT
CONSIDERED OTHER FACTORS TOO
BEFORE BUYING THE CHROMEBOOKS,
INCLUDING COST, AND HAVING TO
ADMINISTER BOTH STATE AND THE
NEW COMMON CORE ASSESSMENT TESTS
ONLINE:
>> THE KEYBOARD IS ALREADY THERE
AND WITH ALL OF THE TESTING AS
WELL WE WERE ALREADY GOING TO
PURCHASE MICE AND THEN
HEADPHONES AS WELL BECAUSE YOU
HAVE TO HAVE HEADPHONES FOR SOME
OF THE DIFFERENT TESTING SO ON A
FINANCIAL END IT WAS LESS
EXPENSIVE TO GO WITH THE
CHROMEBOOK.
>> Reporter: IN OHIO'S EAST
HOLMES LOCAL SCHOOLS THEY'VE
GONE WITH A THIRD OPTION, THIS
IS CALLED THE "LEARN PAD" AND
TEACHERS CONTROL EVERYTHING
THAT'S PUT ON HERE.
THAT WAS DONE TO ADDRESS
CONCERNS OF AMISH PARENTS WHO
DIDN'T WANT THEIR KIDS TO HAVE
ACCESS TO THE INTERNET OR
OBJECTIONABLE GAMES OR CONTENT.
DEVELOPED IN 2011 THE LEARN PAD
IS MUCH LIKE THE iPAD AND
CHROMEBOOK THE LEARN-PAD OFFERS
EDUCATIONAL APPS, GAMES AND
CURRICULUM, BUT IT DOES NOT
HAVEHAS NOWHERE NEAR THE MARKET
SHARE OF THE APPLE AND GOOGLE
PRODUCTS.
>> WE KNOW THAT DEVICES COME AND
GO SO FOCUSING ON THE DEVICES IS
THE WRONG QUESTION.
>> Reporter: KAREN CATOR IS THE
CEO OF DIGITAL PROMISE, A NON-
PROFIT THAT RECENTLY STUDIED HOW
SCHOOLS CAN IMPROVE THE WAY THEY
FIND, BUY AND EVALUATE
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE CLASSROOM:
>> WHAT YOU ACTUALLY PURCHASE
SHOULD BE DRIVEN BY WHAT YOU
WANT TO ACTUALLY DO WITH THAT
TECHNOLOGY.
YOU WANT THEM RESEARCHING, YOU
WANT THEM PRODUCING, YOU WANT
THEM SEEKING, ASKING QUESTIONS,
WHAT ARE ALL OF THE KINDS OF
THINGS THAT YOU WANT STUDENTS TO
BE ABLE TO DO.
>> Reporter: AND IF ONE OF THE
MAIN GOALS OF SCHOOL IS THAT
STUDENTS WILL TAKE WHAT THEY'RE
LEARNING INTO THE JOB MARKET,
FIFTH GRADER KYLEE GRAY SEES HOW
GETTING COMFORTABLE WITH
TECHNOLOGY NOW WILL LIKELY PAY
OFF LATER.
>> PROBABLY EVERY JOB YOU ARE
GOING TO GO TO IS PROBABLY GOING
TO HAVE SOMETHING WITH
TECHNOLOGY.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S HAPPENED
HERE IN AMISH COUNTRY.
GERMAN TEACHER AND LIBRARIAN
JERRY SCHLABACH IS AMISH AND
FOLLOWS MANY OF ITS TRADITIONS,
WHICH IS WHY WE AREN'T SHOWING
HIS FACE.
HE BELIEVES TEACHING AMISH
CHILDREN TO USE TECHNOLOGY IS A
GOOD IDEA, EVEN THOUGH MANY WILL
LEAVE SCHOOL AFTER THE EIGHTH
GRADE.
>> WHEN YOU ARE AMISH AND YOU
ARE GROWING UP THESE DAYS WHY IS
TECHNOLOGY AN IMPORTANT SKILL
FOR THESE KIDS TO LEARN.
>> BECAUSE OF THE CHANGING
TECHNOLOGY IN THE JOB MARKET AND
LOTS OF PEOPLE WANT THEIR NEW
EMPLOYEES TO HAVE SOME COMPUTER
TRAINING WHEN THEY GET INTO THE
JOB MARKET.
>> Reporter: TEACHER SARAH
MEENAN SAYS DESPITE THE FACT
AMISH KIDS DON'T HAVE TECHNOLOGY
AT HOME, THEY HAVE PICKED IT UP
RELATIVELY EASILY
>> THE AMISH KIDS REALLY WANT TO
LEARN SO THEY CATCH ON QUICK
BECAUSE THEY WANT TO BE UP TO
SPEED WITH EVERYBODY ELSE.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME AMISH
CHILDREN STILL CLING TO THE OLD-
FASHIONED WAYS:
>> I JUST LIKE THE EASIER WAY OF
LEARNING LIKE ON A PIECE OF
PAPER WHEN IT'S RIGHT IN FRONT
OF YOU.
>> Reporter: IT'S A SENTIMENT
THAT GOES BEYOND SCHOOL, IN A
COMMUNITY SLOWLY EMBRACING THE
FUTURE, WHILE MAKINSUREG  NOT TO
FORGET THE PAST
I'M APRIL BROWN FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR IN BERLIN, OHIO.
>> Woodruff: THIS WAS A POWERFUL
WEEK IN THE TRIAL OF DZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV, WHO IS CHARGED WITH
THE BOSTON MARATHON BOMBINGS OF
2013.
HE'S FACING 30 FEDERAL CHARGES,
17 OF WHICH CARRY THE DEATH
PENALTY.
HARI SREENIVASAN IN OUR NEW YORK
STUDIOS HAS AN UPDATE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE WEEK STARTED
OFF WITH TESTIMONY FROM VICTIMS
AND THEIR FAMILIES.
IT ALSO INCLUDED REVELATIONS FOR
THE FIRST TIME OF A FULL MESSAGE
THAT A WOUNDED TSARNAEV SCRAWLED
ON A BULLET-RIDDLED BOAT JUST
BEFORE HE WAS CAUGHT BY A
MANHUNT.
AND THE TRIAL SHOWED OFF NEW
SURVEILLANCE VIDEO FROM THE DAY
OF THE ATTACKS ON BOYLSTON
STREET.
EMILY ROONEY OF WGBH-BOSTON HAS
BEEN COVERING THE TRIAL AND
JOINS ME AGAIN TONIGHT.
EMILE ROONEY JOINS ME WITH
EMOTIONAL TESTIMONY TIIS WEEK.
WHO DID YOU HEAR FROM?
>> WE DID, HARI.
THE PERSON WE HEARD FROM THAT
STUCK OUT IN EVERYBODY'S MIND
WAS A YOUNG WOMAN NAMED JESSICA
KENSKI.
SHE CAME INTO COURT, WEARING A
SKIRT, YOU COULD SEE TWO STUMPS
OUT FROM UNDER THE SKIRT.
IT'S THE FIRST TIME DZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV RECOGNIZED ANYBODY.
HE'S BEEN COMPLETELY DISENGAGED
THE WHOLE TIME.
HE LOOKED AT HER, AT HER STUMPS
AND MOVED AWAY.
BUT SHE WAS EMOTIONAL, POIGNANT,
FUNNY, TALKED VERY POWERFULLY
ABOUT HOW HER LIFE AND HER
HUSBAND'S LIFE HAVE CHANGED.
THEY BOTH LOST LEGS.
SHE ENDED UP HAVING TO HAVE HER
SECOND LEG REMOVED JUST THIS
MONTH -- ACTUALLY A COUPLE OF
MONTHS AGO IN JANUARY.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK
ABOUT THE SURVEILLANCE VIDEO
THAT PICKED UP STEAM AND HEAT
AND LIGHT THIS WEEK.
WHAT DID WE SEE THERE?
>> AFTER THE VICTIMS WERE DONE,
THE F.B.I. STARTED ITS TESTIMONY
THIS WEEK.
IT WAS IMPRESSIVE, I HAVE TO
SAY, HARI.
THE FIRST PIECE OF VIDEO WE SAW
WAS 7 MINUTES OF
STITCHED-TOGETHER SURVEILLANCE
VIZ OWE FROM BUSINESSES,
RESTAURANTS, iPhoneS, YOU NAME
IT, ANY KIND OF DEVICE THAT THE
F.B.I. COULD DISCOVER THROUGH
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE BUSINESSES
AND YOU COULD ACTUALLY SEE THE
TSARNAEV BROTHERS WHEN THEY
ENTERED WHERE THE FINISH LINE
ALL THE WAY WHERE THEY DIP DOWN,
DROP THEIR BACKPACKS AND TAKE
OFF.
SO IT'S A VERY IMPRESSIVE RUN OF
O.DE
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
MESSAGE HE SCRAWLED INSIDE THE
BOAT?
A LOT OF US REMEMBER THE
HELICOPTER SHOTS, THE THERMAL
HEAT IMAGES.
WHAT WAS HAPPENING IN THE BOAT?
>> THAT WAS MUCH MORE EXTENSIVE
THAN ANYBODY HAD ANY KNOWLEDGE
OF BEFORE.
WE KNEW HE HAD LEFT A NOTE.
WHAT HAPPENED WAS HE FOUND A
PENCIL SOMEHOW AND WROTE IN
PENCIL ON THE INSIDE OF THIS
BOAT -- THE NOTE GOES ON FOR
SEVERAL PARAGRAPHS AND READS IN
PART AT SOME POINT "THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT SKILLING OUR INNOCENT
CIVILIANS BUT MOST OF YOU
ALREADY KNOW THAT.
AS A MUSLIM, I CAN'T STAND TO
SEE SUCH EVIL GO UNPUNISHED.
IT WENT ON AND TALKED ABOUT HIS
BROTHER BEING A MARTYR AND HE
WAS JEALOUS OF HIS MOTHER HAVING
PRECEDED HIM IN DEATH AND SAID
HE DIDN'T LIKE KILLING INNOCENT
CIVILIANS BUT IN THIS CASE IT
WAS JUSTIFIED.
SO NOW THE JUDGE HAS DECIDED, BY
THE WAY, WHETHER THE ENTIRE BOAT
WILL BE ENTERED IN EVIDENCE OR
JUST THE PANEL WITH THE NOTE
BECAUSE THE DEFENSE WANTS TO
SHOW HE WAS ENTOMBED IN THE BOAT
20 HOURS, NO FOOD, NO WATER AND
THERE WAS A COVER ON IT AND
MAYBE HE WASN'T IN HIS RIGHT
MIND.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT SHOULD WE
EXPECT GOING INTO MONDAY?
>> MONDAY OR TUESDAY WILL BE
VERY INTERESTING, BUT THE SAME
EPIC SHOOTOUT THAT OCCURRED
APRIL 19 FOUR DAYS AFTER THE
MARATHON BOMBING, THEY'VE
ALREADY ESTABLISHED THAT
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV WAS UNARMED IN
THE VOTE.
THERE WERE HUNDREDS AND ROUNDS
OF AMMUNITION THAT WERE FIRED
THAT NIGHT.
ONE POLICE OFFICER WAS NEARLY
MORTALLY WOUNDED, LOST A LOT OF
BLOOD AND SINCE RECOVERED.
I THINK WE'LL SEE A LOT OF VIDEO
SURVEILLANCE FROM POLICE
OFFICERS, FROM, YOU KNOW, POLICE
CRUISER CARS AND MAYBE ONCE
AGAIN FROM NEIGHBORS AND PEOPLE
WITHIN THE AREA WHO WERE
VIDEOTAPING AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: EMILE ROONEY
OF WGBH IN BOSTON.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS, HARI.
>> Woodruff: AND TO THE ANALYSIS
OF SHIELDS AND GERSON, THAT'S
SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND WASHINGTON POST
COLUMNIST MICHAEL GERSON.
DAVID BROOKS IS AWAY
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THE E-MAILS.
LET'S TALK ABOUT HILLARY
CLINTON'S-MAI ELS.
DID SHE ANSWER ALL THE QUESTIONS
OUT THERE IN THE NEWS CONFERENCE
THIS WEEK?
>> OF COURSE NOT.
THE QUESTIONS WILL KEEP COMING
AND KEEP COMING.
THERE WAS ONE RESULT OF IT THAT
JUST HIT ME SO HARD AND THAT IS
THE GREAT ADVICE, BEWARE OF ANY
NATIONAL LEADER -- AND I DON'T
LIMIT THIS TO SECRETARY CLINTON,
BY ANY MEANS -- BUT WHO DOES NOT
HAVE CLOSE TO HIM OR HER
CONTEMPORARY FRIENDS AND
CONFIDANTS WHO CAN TELL THEM
WHEN NECESSARY THEY'RE
ABSOLUTELY WRONG.
JERRY FORD DID.
HE WAS ENORMOUSLY EMOTIONALLY
SECURE MAN.
RONALD REAGAN CHOSE JIM BAKKER
TO BE A CHIEF OF STAFF, RAN TWO
CAMPAIGNS AGAINST HIM, AS AN
EXAMPLE OF THAT A SORT OF
EMOTIONAL SECURITY AND
STABILITY.
I JUST ASK MRS. CLINTON, WHO
AMONG YOUR GROUP OF ADVISORS
WILL YOU HAVE THE IDEA OF HAVING
A PERSONAL COMPUTER EMAIL
SERVICE OF YOUR OWN, AN
INDIVIDUAL ONE, WHO WOULD SAY,
ARE YOU OUT OF YOUR EXPLOITIVE
DELETIVE MIND?
THIS IS POLITICALLY, PROBABLY
MORALLY INDEFENSIBLE AND
PROBABLY LEGALLY PROBLEMATIC.
THAT'S THE QUESTION THAT BOTHERS
ME WHETHER THE RELEVANCE OR
IRRELEVANCE OF THE E-MAILS TURNS
OUT TO BE ANYTHING AT ALL
SUBSTANTIVELY, THAT IS A REAL
PROBLEM.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT THE
QUESTIONS?
DID SHE ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS?
>> WELL, I THINK THE PROPER WORD
FOR THE PRESS CONFERENCE, IT WAS
REALLY BRAZEN.
IT WAS BOLD.
SHE WENT OUT THERE, HAD TOTAL
CONTROL OVER HER E-MAILS IN A
PRIVATE SERVER WHILE SHE WAS
SERVING IN GOVERNMENT.
SHE AND HER PEOPLE DECIDED WHAT
SHOULD BE REVEALED AND
ELIMINATED --
>> Woodruff: WHICH BY THE WAY
THAT'S WHAT SHE SAID GOVERNMENT
EMPLOYEES --
>> THEY ENDED UP ELIMINATING
30,000 E-MAILS AND THERE ARE
QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW THIS TOOK
PLACE.
IT WAS DONE THROUGH KEY WORD
SEARCHES, THE WAY THEY DECIDED
WHAT TO ELIMINATE AND NOT TO.
I THINK IT RAISED A LOT OF
QUESTIONS THERE.
SO SHE HAD PEOPLE ADVISING HER,
DEMOCRATS, WHO THOUGHT SHE
SHOULD BE TRANSPARENT, SHE
SHOULD TURN OVER HER SERVER, SHE
SHOULD HAVE AN INDEPENDENT
AUTHORITY REVIEW THIS, AND SHE
COMPLETELY REJECTED THAT ADVICE.
THIS WAS THE EQUIVALENT -- I
MEAN, SOME PEOPLE ADVISED
RICHARD NIXON HE SHOULD HAVE
BURNED THE TAPES ON THE FRONT
LAWN OF THE WHITE HOUSE, THIS
WAS THE DIGITAL EQUIVALENT.
SHE BURNED THE TAPES.
>> Woodruff: I MEAN, SO WHAT
ARE WE LEFT WITH?
MARK, YOU SAID SHE MADE A HUGE
MISTAKE IN THE FIRST PLACE.
WHERE DOES SHE GO FROM HERE?
>> WELL, THIS IS A QUESTION THAT
NAGS AT DEMOCRATS.
WE'RE SAYING IT RIGHT AT THE
OUTSET THAT RELATIONS WITH THE
PRESS ARE FROSTY TO THE POINT OF
ARCTIC AND THERE IS A SENSE NOT
SIMPLY FROM THIS BUT THAT WE'RE
GOING BACK INTO -- LET'S GO TO
THE BARRICADES, LET'S CIRCLE THE
WAGONS.
THERE'S A CERTAIN MENTALITY THAT
WAY.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO TAKE
ANYTHING.
I THINK IN A NATION THAT IS
POLARIZED POLITICALLY AS WE ARE,
AS ACRIMONIOUS AS IT HAS BECOME,
I THINK THIS IS REALLY NOT THE
ATMOSPHERE THAT YOU WANT TO
CREATE.
SHE IS NOT THE ONLY PERSON WHO
HAS AN EMAIL PROBLEM, BY ANY
MEANS, EVERY CANDIDATE ON THE
REPUBLICAN SIDE HAS AN EMAIL AND
THEY'VE MADE UNILATERAL,
GOVERNOR BUSH MADE UNILATERAL
DECISIONS ON WHAT WAS PERSONAL,
GOVERNOR WALKER HAS PERSISTENT
PROBLEMS.
BUT I'M JUST TALKING ABOUT THE
APPROACH.
DAVID GEHRIGEN WENT TO THE WHITE
HOUSE HAVING WORKED FOR
PRESIDENT REAGAN, BUSH AND FORD
TO WORK FOR THE PRESIDENT.
WHITEWATER WAS THE BIG THING.
DAVID SAID PUT OUT ALL THE
INFORMATION, JUST LET OUT THE
INFORMATION.
THEY BASICALLY IGNORED HIM AND
DID NOT TAKE HIS ADVICE AND
THAT'S SORT OF A MEASURE OF
LOYALTY.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL, DOES SHE
GET BEYOND THIS?
>> I DON'T THINK THIS IS FATAL
BY ANY STRETCH OF THE
IMAGINATION.
IN FACT, THE STRATEGY MAY WELL
HAVE WORKED, IF THE E-MAILS ARE
DESTROYED, YOU KNOW, MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS, THEY DEMAND TO SEIZE
THE SERVER, WE'LL SEE HOW THAT
HAPPENS, BUT IT MAY WELL HAVE
WORKED.
BUT I DO THINK HILLARY CLINTON
HAS NO RIVALS IN THE PARTY, NO
SERIOUS RIVALS, NO SECOND-TIER
RIVALS.
YOU KNOW, THIS IS A CASE WHERE
AN OVERWHELMING FAVORITE IS NOW
CAUSING SERIOUS CONCERNS AMONG
DEMOCRATS  BOUT THE QUALITY OF
THEIR CANDIDATE.
THERE ARE SOME DEMOCRATS EVEN
TALKING AND WRITING NOW SAYING
SHE MIGHT BENEFIT FROM A
CHALLENGE.
IT MIGHT SHARPEN HER SKILLS.
IT RIGHT REINTRODUCE HER TO
ELEMENTS OF A PARTY THAT SHE
HASN'T BEEN CLOSE TO IN A LONG
TIME.
I THINK SHE IS THE OVERWHELMING
FAVORITE AND RAISING CONCERNS IN
HER OWN PARTY.
>> SHE'S OVER 80% FAVORABLE
AMONG DEMOCRATS.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT ANOTHER
STORY THAT WAS VERY MUCH OUT
THERE THIS WEEK.
THE LETTER, MARK, 47 REPUBLICAN
SENATORS SENDING A LETTER TO THE
LEADERSHIP IN IRAN SAYING BE
CAREFUL, DON'T SIGN A NUCLEAR
A WELL-ADVISED TO SIGNATES.
AND DO THIS?
>> A COLUMNIST WITH IMPECCABLE
CREDENTIALS WROTE IN TIMING,
TONE AND QUESTIONS THAT RAISES
QUESTIONS ABOUT REPUBLICANS'
CAPACITY TO GOVERNOR EVERYONE,
AND JUST BY ACCIDENT MICHAEL
HAPPENS TO BE HERE, THE AUTHOR
OF THESE WORDS.
HE SAID IT VERY WELL.
THIS, JUDY WAS MORE THAN A FAUX
PAS OR A SLIPUP.
I THINK IT IS A REFLECTION OF
MITCH MCCONNELL IN A REALLY
NEGATIVE WAY THAT HIS LEADERSHIP
IS DEFECTIVE.
THE FACT THAT HE DIDN'T EVEN
CONSULT WITH THE CHAIRMAN OF THE
FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE OF
HIS OWN PARTY WHO OPPOSED THIS
AND WAS TRYING TO PUT TOGETHER A
BIPARTISAN COALITION OF
DEMOCRATS WHO HAD DOUBTS AND
SKEPTICISM ABOUT THE IRANIAN
DEAL, THAT HE JUST STEAM ROLLED
IT AHEAD AND MADE IT A MATTER OF
PARTY LOYALTY AND PARTY UNIT AND
ESSENTIALLY PUT US IN A POSITION
WHERE WE'RE AT ODDS WITH OUR
EUROPEAN ALLIES WHO ARE NOW
DOUBTING THE UNITED STATES AND
WHETHER WE CAN BE RELIED UPON,
AND TO SABOTAGE BIPARTISANSHIP,
IT WAS DONE EFFECTIVELY IN THE
SENATE, AND TO SABOTAGE THE
HOPES OF ANY KIND OF A DEAL TO
LIMIT THE NUCLEAR BUILDING OF
THE IRANIANS.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL, YOU'VE
JUST BEEN QUOTED.
>> I TALKED WITH SOME REPUBLICAN
SENATORS TODAY.
THERE'S A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT OF
BUYER'S REMORSE --
>> Woodruff: SENATORS WHO
SIGNED IT.
>> EXACTLY, CONCERNS ABOUT THE
PROCESS, BECAUSE SOME SIENTD ON
THEIR WAY OUT THE DOOR TO GO TO
AIRPLANES A WHEN THE SNOW WAS
COMING.
THAT'S NOT THE WAY YOU DO
STRATEGY.
THAT'S NOT THE WAY YOU CONSULT
WITHIN A CAUCUS.
I THINK A LOT OF REPUBLICANS
REALIZE THAT.
YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
THIS HAS THROWN A WRENCH IN A
PROCESS WHERE SENATOR CORKER WAS
DOING OUTREACH TO DEMOCRATS IN
ORDER TO PROPOSE LEGISLATION TO
HAVE THE CONGRESS INVOLVED IN
THE PROCESS OF APPROVING A DEAL.
HE WAS TWO-VOTES AWAY FROM A
MAJORITY IN THE SENATE.
NOW THEY WILL HAVE TO ASSESS
THIS COMING WEEK WHETHER THAT'S
BEEN UNDERMINED BY THROWING THIS
PARTISAN ISSUE IN THE MIDDLE OF
THIS DEBATE.
>> IS IT BEARING ON REACHING A
NUCLEAR DEAL?
DO YOU THINK THIS WILL AFFECT
THAT?
>> I THINK IT'S HURTFUL.
IT CERTAINLY ISN'T HELPFUL.
I THINK THE PRESIDENT DID HAVE A
FORMULATION THAT BY THIS ACTION
THEY HAVE STRENGTHENED THE HAND
OF THE HARD LINERS IN TEHRAN.
AND CONTRARY TO SENATOR COTTON'S
PROCLAMATION, HE SAID NOT
EVERYONE IS A HARD LINER IN
IRAN.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S CHANGED
THE DYNAMICS, WHICH IS AN
INTERNAL DYNAMIC.
THE ADMINISTRATION WANTS A KEEL
AND THE OTHER SIDE KNOWS THEY
WANT A DEAL.
THAT'S THE BASIC PROBLEM.
I'M NOT SURE THAT CHANGES THIS
DYNAMIC.
>> THERE ARE SEVEN NATIONS
INVOLVED HERE.
THIS ISN'T JUST BARACK OBAMA AND
THE REPUBLICAN SENATE CONGRESS.
THIS IS FRANCE AND GREAT BRITAIN
AND GERMANY AND CHINA AND RUSSIA
AND THE UNITED STATES AND IRAN
TRYING TO COME TO A DEAL.
THAT IS A REMARKABLE ACHIEVEMENT
IF YOU CAN PULL IT OFF WITH
THOSE SEVEN COUNTRIES ALL
AGREEING ON INSPECTIONS AND
THAT'S IMPORTANT.
>> AND IF THEY DON'T REACH THAT
DEAL, IT'S ACTUALLY IMPORTANT
FOR AMERICA TO LOOK LIKE IT
TRIED HARD, THAT IT WAS
REASONABLE IN THIS PROCESS.
IF IT'S GOING TO MAINTAIN
SANCTIONS IN THE AFTERMATH OF A
FAILURE, THAT'S ONE OTHER REASON
I THINK THE LETTER WAS
PROBLEMATIC.
IT LOOKED LIKE REPUBLICANS WERE
TRYING TO UNDERMINE THE DEAL.
>> NO QUESTION.
>> Woodruff: FINAL THING I
WANT TO ASK YOU BOTH ABOUT
UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA,
FRATERNITY, MARK, RACIST CHANT
BY A GROUP OF FRATERNITY
MEMBERS.
A COUPLE HAVE NOW BEEN EXPELLED.
GUESS MY QUESTION IS WHAT IS
THIS -- AND IT'S A QUESTION I
PUT TO THE PRESIDENT, THE
UNIVERSITY, THE FORMER GOVERNOR,
WHAT DOES THIS SAY ABOUT WHETHER
WE CAN EVER GET RID OF RACISM IN
THIS COUNTRY?
>> WELL, JUDY, LAST WEEKEND WE
DID OBSERVE SELMA, PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND PRESIDENT BUSH WAS
THERE AND HUNDREDS OF MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS.
KEVIN McCARTHY DID GO.
THAT WAS A MEASURE OF OUR
PROGRESS AND WE HAVE COME A LONG
WAY.
BUT RACISM KNOWS NO ZIP CODE.
IT'S NOT A MATTER OF A TMEI ZONE
OR PARTICULAR REGION OF THE
COUNTRY, AND THE MOST
DISHEARTENING ABOUT THIS BEYOND
THE HATE EXPRESSED IS THESE ARE
YOUNG, EDUCATED PEOPLE.
WE'VE THOUGHT THAT THE NEXT
GENERATION -- AND IT HAS BEEN,
HISTORICALLY, BY EVERY
MEASUREMENT MORE ENTIGHTENED,
MORE TOLERANT, LESS SENSITIVE TO
RACE.
>> AND SELMA IS REPRESENTATIVE
OF HUGE PROGRESS BUT NOT
PERFECT.
IT STANDS IN PERPETUAL JUDGMENT
OF OUR PRACTICE THAT LEADS US
FORWARD AND THAT IDEAL HAS TO BE
PASSED TO THE NEXT GENERATION.
THAT'S PART OF THE GOAL OF
EDUCATION.
AND ONE REASON I THINK SENATOR
BOREN, NOW PRESIDENT OF THAT
UNIVERSITY, HAS DONE A GREAT
JOB.
HE CAME DOWN LIKE A TON OF
BRICKS ON THIS MATTER.
HE SET THE PROPER MORAL MESSAGES
TO THE STUDENTS IN HIS CARE AT
THAT UNIVERSITY.
SO I THINK THAT HE HAS DONE A
LOT TO PASS THIS ALONG.
>> WELL, WE CERTAINLY PAID
ATTENTION TO IT AND, AS HE SAID
AT THE END OF THAT CONVERSATION,
MAYBE SOMETHING GOOD WILL COME
OUT OF IT BECAUSE HE SAID THERE
ARE NOW CONVERSATIONS ON THE
CAMPUS THAT WEREN'T HAPPENING
BEFORE.
MARK SHIELDS, MICHAEL GERSON, WE
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: DON'T GO ANYWHERE,
WE'LL BE BACK WITH A REMEMBRANCE
OF MICHAEL GRAVES, THE ARCHITECT
WHO BROUGHT DESIGN TO THE
MASSES, BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE
WEEK ON P.B.S.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, AN
APPRECIATION OF AN ARCHITECT
WHOSE WORK AND DESIGN FOR THE
EVERYDAY HOUSEHOLD CAPTURED THE
PUBLIC'S IMAGINATION.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR LOOK.
>> Brown: AROUND THE WORLD AND
ESPECIALLY IN THIS COUNTRY,
MICHAEL GRAVES LEFT HIS MARK
THROUGH BUILDINGS OF COLOR AND
ORNAMENT.
THE MUNICIPAL BUILDING, IN
PORTLAND, OREGON, THE HUMANA
BUILDING IN LOUISVILLE,
KENTUCKY, AND THE DISNEY
CORPORATION'S HEADQUARTERS IN
BURBANK, CALIFORNIA.
YET HE WAS KNOWN TO MANY MORE
FOR HIS SMALLER WORKS, DESIGNING
HOUSEHOLD GOODS LIKE TOASTERS,
CLOCKS AND HIS FAMOUS WHISTLING
TEA KETTLE THROUGH A PARTNERSHIP
WITH TARGET STORES IN THE 1990S.
>> MICHAEL GRAVES IS A RARE
INDIVIDUAL WHO FINDS EQUAL
WONDER IN THINGS BOTH LARGE AND
SMALL.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT CLINTON
AWARDED GRAVES THE NATIONAL
MEDAL OF THE ARTS IN 1999.
AT THE TIME GRAVES HAD DESIGNED
THE SCAFFOLDING FOR THE
WASHINGTON MONUMENT'S
RENOVATION,
HE SPOKE TO MARGARET WARNER
ABOUT THAT PROJECT AND HIS
BROADER INTERESTS.
>> I'VE NEVER THOUGHT THAT
ARCHITECTURE IS LIMITED TO, YOU
KNOW, MAKING JUST BUILDINGS.
WE CAME THROUGH A TIME IN THE
1950S WHERE ARCHITECTS BECAME
SPECIALISTS.
THEY WERE GOING TO ONLY DO
MUSEUMS OR ONLY DO, LETS SAY,
OFFICE BUILDINGS.
BUT SMALL THINGS, AS WELL AS
LARGE THINGS, INTEREST ME A
WHOLE LOT, AND I DON'T SEE WHY
TO, WHY I SHOULD STOP AT THE
MOMENT WE REACH THE DOOR.
>> Reporter: BORN IN
INDIANAPOLIS IN 1934, GRAVES
STUDIED ARCHITECTURE AT HARVARD
BUT FOUND IT TOO HEAVILY
INFLUENCED BY THE MID-CENTURY
MODERN ARCHITECTURE MOVEMENT.
HE HEADED TO ROME FOR TWO YEARS
TO STUDY CLASSICAL DESIGN, AN
EXPERIENCE THAT WOULD PROFOUNDLY
INFLUENCE HIS WORK TOWARD WHAT
BECAME KNOWN AS POST-MODERN
ARCHITECTURE.
IN 2003 GRAVES CONTRACTED A FLU-
LIKE INFECTION THAT LEFT HIM
PARALYZED FROM THE WAIST DOWN.
THAT INSPIRED YET ANOTHER PHASE:
DESIGNING PRODUCTS FOR PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES, AND BUILDINGS
FOR HEALTHCARE FACILITIES, LIKE
THE WOUNDED WARRIOR HOME PROJECT
IN FORT BELVOIR, VIRGINIA.
MICHAEL GRAVES DIED OF NATURAL
CAUSES AT HIS HOME IN PRINCETON,
NEW RSEJEY.
HE WAS 80 YEARS OLD.
>> Brown: SOME FURTHER INSIGHT
NOW ON THE INFLUENCE AND REACH
OF MICHAEL GRAVES.
ROBERT IVY IS CEO OF THE
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ARCHITECTS
WE USE THIS TERM "POST-MODERN"
BUT HELP US UNDERSTAND, WHAT WAS
MICHAEL GRAVES FIGHTING AGAINST
AND WHAT DID HE DO?
>> DRIVE THROUGH ANY AMERICAN
CITY TODAY AND YOU SEE TALL
BOXES, ESSENTIALLY.
WE COULD IN GROSS TERMS CALL
THAT MODERNISM.
BUT MICHAEL REALLY BROKE US OUT
OF THE BOX.
WHAT AN EXCITING MOMENT I CAN
CERTAINLY SAY FOR DESIGN
PROFESSIONALS BUT FOR THE REST
OF THE WORLD TO SEE COLOR AND
THE USES OF HISTORY AND EVEN WIT
AND IRONY IN PROJECTS.
IN THE EARLY '80s, IT HAD A
STRONG FLOWERING AND CHANGED THE
WAY WE LOOK AT BUILDINGS AND
STILL HAS SOME IMPORT TODAY.
>> YOU LOOK AT THE PORTLAND
BUILDING, OTHER BUILDINGS.
NOT EVERYONE LOVED IT, RIGHT?
AND STILL NOT EVERYONE LOVES IT.
>> THOSE PROJECTS STILL ELICIT
CONTROVERSY, AS MUCH TODAY
PERHAPS MORE THAN THEN.
HOWEVER, I THINK THE FLOWERING
OF ARCHITECTURE WE'RE ENJOYING
TODAY, AN EXUBERANCE OF FORM AND
FREEDOM HAVE COME ABOUT BECAUSE
OF PEOPLE LIKE MICHAEL GRAVES
AND CHANGED THE WAY HE WIE
THINK.
>> Brown: AND CHANGED THE WAY
WE LIVE IN OUR HOMES, THIS IDEA
THAT DESIGN IS FOR EVERYONE.
>> HE POPULARIZED DESIGN.
IT HAS THE ABILITY TO CHANGE OUR
LIVES FOR THE BETTER.
MICHAEL WAS AN EARLY PROPONENT
TO BRINGING THE DESIGN INTO OUR
HOMES.
THROUGH WORK WITH COMPANIES LIKE
TARGET AND J.C. PENNEY, HE
WORKED ON PROJECTS FOR EVERYDAY
LIFE, TEA KETTLES, EVERYDAY
OBJECTS THAT HE BROUGHT DESIGN
TO THAT FEEL BETTER IN YOUR
HANDS AND LOOK BETTER IN YOUR
HOUSE AND POPULARIZED THAT
DESIGN.
HE BECAME THE BEST KNOWN
ARCHITECT IN THE WORLD.
>> Brown: DID THAT HURT HIM
PROFESSIONALLY?
BECAUSE IT WAS SO UNUSUAL FOR
SOMEONE AT HIS LEVEL TO GET
INVOLVED WITH TEA KETTLES,
PERHAPS.
>> IT'S TRUE IT DREW SOME
CRITICAL WORK BY, I WOULD SAY,
PROFESSIONAL CRITICS AND EVEN
THOSE WHO, PERHAPS, WERE
JEALOUS.
OPERATE, FOR DESIGN, IT WAS A
GREAT MOMENT BECAUSE IT BROUGHT
DESIGN INTO THE HOME.
AND HE CONTINUED TO HAVE A
THRIVING PRACTICE DOING LARGE
PRACTICE, PRIMARILY.
WE ADMIRE BOTH HIS LARGE AND HIS
SMALL WORK TODAY.
>> Brown: VERY BRIEFLY, THE
WORK IN HEALTHCARE BECAUSE OF
HIS OWN DISABILITY BECAME
IMPORTANT TO HIM IN THE END.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
HE WAS STRICKEN AND CONFINED TO
A WHEELCHAIR.
HE TOOK ON THE ROLE OF DESIGN IN
HEALTH WHICH ARCHITECTS ARE
TAKING UP TODAY AND BECAME ONE
OF ITS MOST ARDENT SPOKES PEOPLE
APPOINTED TO THE U.S. ACCESS
BOARD AND SUCH A PROMINENT
PERSON WITH SUCH A PULPIT
ACTUALLY WORKED FOR ALL OF OUR
GOOD.
I THINK HE WAS AN INSPIRATION
FOR ALL OF US FOR HIS TALENT AND
THE WAY HE USED IT.
>> Brown: ROBERT IVY ON THE
LIFE AND WORK OF MICHAEL GRAVES.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
STOCKS SANK AS OIL PRICES FELL.
THE DOW INDUSTRIALS WERE OFF
NEARLY 150 POINTS.
AND POLICE IN FERGUSON, MISSOURI
SPENT A SECOND DAY HUNTING FOR
SUSPECTS IN THE WOUNDING OF TWO
OFFICERS.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE, TOMORROW
IS "PI DAY," NO NOT THAT PIE,
THE MATHEMATICAL CONSTANT, OR
3.14
BUT, WE THOUGHT, WHY NOT
CELEBRATE BOTH?
CELEBRITY CHEF EMERIL LAGASSE
GAVE US HIS FAMOUS BANANA CREAM
PIE RECIPE, AND YOU CAN FIND
THAT ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
WHILE YOU'RE THERE, LEAVE US A
MESSAGE AND TELL US HOW YOU'RE
CELEBRATING "PI DAY", OR TWEET
TO US, WE'RE @newshour.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
AND A REMINDER ABOUT SOME
UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> Ifill: TONIGHT WE LOOK AT
THREE THINGS WE DIDN'T SEE
COMING, THE LATEST REVELATIONS
ABOUT THE SECRET SERVICE, THE
UPROAR OVER HILLARY CLINTON'S
SECRET EMAILS AND YOGA ROUTINES
AND THE BACK STORY ON THE LETTER
47 REPUBLICAN SENATORS SENT TO
IRAN.
THERE'S MORE TO KNOW, AND WE'LL
HAVE IT FOR YOU, LATER TONIGHT,
ON WASHINGTON WEEK.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SATURDAY, AN UPDATE ON A
STORY THAT LOOKS AT WHAT HAPPENS
TO THE ONLINE ACCOUNTS THAT MAKE
UP YOUR DIGITAL ESTATE AFTER
YOU'RE GONE.
AND WE'LL BE BACK, RIGHT HERE,
ON MONDAY.
THE LATEST FROM ISRAEL, AHEAD OF
ELECTIONS WITH PRIME MINISTER
NETANYAHU ON THE LINE.
THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT,
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF, HAVE A GREAT
WEEKEND.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.